Documentation/kbuild/gcc-plugins.rst, before:

=========================
GCC plugin infrastructure
=========================


Introduction
============

GCC plugins are loadable modules that provide extra features to the
compiler [1]_. They are useful for runtime instrumentation and static analysis.
We can analyse, change and add further code during compilation via
callbacks [2]_, GIMPLE [3]_, IPA [4]_ and RTL passes [5]_.

The GCC plugin infrastructure of the kernel supports all gcc versions from
4.5 to 6.0, building out-of-tree modules, cross-compilation and building in a
separate directory.
Plugin source files have to be compilable by both a C and a C++ compiler as well
because gcc versions 4.5 and 4.6 are compiled by a C compiler,
gcc-4.7 can be compiled by a C or a C++ compiler,
and versions 4.8+ can only be compiled by a C++ compiler.

Currently the GCC plugin infrastructure supports only the x86, arm, arm64 and
powerpc architectures.

This infrastructure was ported from grsecurity [6]_ and PaX [7]_.

--

.. [1] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Plugins.html
.. [2] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Plugin-API.html#Plugin-API
.. [3] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/GIMPLE.html
.. [4] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/IPA.html
.. [5] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/RTL.html
.. [6] https://grsecurity.net/
.. [7] https://pax.grsecurity.net/


Files
=====

**$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins**

	This is the directory of the GCC plugins.

**$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/gcc-common.h**

	This is a compatibility header for GCC plugins.
	It should be always included instead of individual gcc headers.

**$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugin.sh**

	This script checks the availability of the included headers in
	gcc-common.h and chooses the proper host compiler to build the plugins
	(gcc-4.7 can be built by either gcc or g++).

**$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/gcc-generate-gimple-pass.h,
$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/gcc-generate-ipa-pass.h,
$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/gcc-generate-simple_ipa-pass.h,
$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/gcc-generate-rtl-pass.h**

	These headers automatically generate the registration structures for
	GIMPLE, SIMPLE_IPA, IPA and RTL passes. They support all gcc versions
	from 4.5 to 6.0.
	They should be preferred to creating the structures by hand.


Usage
=====

You must install the gcc plugin headers for your gcc version,
e.g., on Ubuntu for gcc-4.9::

	apt-get install gcc-4.9-plugin-dev

Or on Fedora::

	dnf install gcc-plugin-devel

Enable a GCC plugin based feature in the kernel config::

	CONFIG_GCC_PLUGIN_CYC_COMPLEXITY = y

To compile only the plugin(s)::

	make gcc-plugins

or just run the kernel make and compile the whole kernel with
the cyclomatic complexity GCC plugin.


4. How to add a new GCC plugin
==============================

The GCC plugins are in $(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/. You can use a file or a directory
here. It must be added to $(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/Makefile,
$(src)/scripts/Makefile.gcc-plugins and $(src)/arch/Kconfig.
See the cyc_complexity_plugin.c (CONFIG_GCC_PLUGIN_CYC_COMPLEXITY) GCC plugin.

Commit message:

[ALPS07250337] ACK: Merge android12-5.10-2022-04 R3 into alps-mp-s0.mp1
[Target]:
    23316b952934505aba11fb0b605cade5038ecad9
    UPSTREAM: Revert "xfrm: xfrm_state_mtu should

[Source:] kernel/common android12-5.10-2022-04
[From:] 803ff1161c13 UPSTREAM: binder: Add...
[  To:] 23316b952934 UPSTREAM: Revert "xfrm: xfrm_state_mtu should

[GKI:]
https://ci.android.com/builds/submitted/8581285/kernel_aarch64/latest
https://ci.android.com/builds/submitted/8584196/gsi_arm64-user/latest

MTK-Commit-Id: f6bed7898419cc4eb728d276158be3fe7c90e5ad

Feature: Kernel SI Operation
CR-Id: ALPS07250337
Signed-off-by: Bo Ye <bo.ye@mediatek.com>
Change-Id: I82c684a16085a2c48a7e9a3da432f1ef9d1b3b10

Documentation/kbuild/gcc-plugins.rst, after:

=========================
GCC plugin infrastructure
=========================


Introduction
============

GCC plugins are loadable modules that provide extra features to the
compiler [1]_. They are useful for runtime instrumentation and static analysis.
We can analyse, change and add further code during compilation via
callbacks [2]_, GIMPLE [3]_, IPA [4]_ and RTL passes [5]_.

The GCC plugin infrastructure of the kernel supports building out-of-tree
modules, cross-compilation and building in a separate directory.
Plugin source files have to be compilable by a C++ compiler.

Currently the GCC plugin infrastructure supports only some architectures.
Grep "select HAVE_GCC_PLUGINS" to find out which architectures support
GCC plugins.

This infrastructure was ported from grsecurity [6]_ and PaX [7]_.

--

.. [1] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Plugins.html
.. [2] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Plugin-API.html#Plugin-API
.. [3] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/GIMPLE.html
.. [4] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/IPA.html
.. [5] https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/RTL.html
.. [6] https://grsecurity.net/
.. [7] https://pax.grsecurity.net/


Files
=====

**$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins**

	This is the directory of the GCC plugins.

**$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/gcc-common.h**

	This is a compatibility header for GCC plugins.
	It should be always included instead of individual gcc headers.

**$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/gcc-generate-gimple-pass.h,
$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/gcc-generate-ipa-pass.h,
$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/gcc-generate-simple_ipa-pass.h,
$(src)/scripts/gcc-plugins/gcc-generate-rtl-pass.h**

	These headers automatically generate the registration structures for
	GIMPLE, SIMPLE_IPA, IPA and RTL passes.
	They should be preferred to creating the structures by hand.


Usage
=====

You must install the gcc plugin headers for your gcc version,
e.g., on Ubuntu for gcc-10::

	apt-get install gcc-10-plugin-dev

Or on Fedora::

	dnf install gcc-plugin-devel

Enable the GCC plugin infrastructure and some plugin(s) you want to use
in the kernel config::

	CONFIG_GCC_PLUGINS=y
	CONFIG_GCC_PLUGIN_CYC_COMPLEXITY=y
	CONFIG_GCC_PLUGIN_LATENT_ENTROPY=y
	...

To compile the minimum tool set including the plugin(s)::

	make scripts

or just run the kernel make and compile the whole kernel with
the cyclomatic complexity GCC plugin.


4. How to add a new GCC plugin
==============================

The GCC plugins are in scripts/gcc-plugins/. You need to put plugin source files
right under scripts/gcc-plugins/. Creating subdirectories is not supported.
It must be added to scripts/gcc-plugins/Makefile, scripts/Makefile.gcc-plugins
and a relevant Kconfig file.
See the cyc_complexity_plugin.c (CONFIG_GCC_PLUGIN_CYC_COMPLEXITY) GCC plugin.
